the following content is provided under
a Creative Commons license your support
will help MIT OpenCourseWare continue to
offer high quality educational resources
for free
to make a donation or to view additional
materials from hundreds of MIT courses
visit MIT opencourseware at ocw.mit.edu
all right so enzymes of course are
catalysts and that leads us to our next
unit which is kinetics and it's our next
unit and in fact our last unit of the
semester so we're going to be talking
about kinetics for the rest of the
semester which sounds like a long time
but it really isn't alright so we switch
to today's handout so kinetics and
thermodynamics is this sort of yin-yang
you really have to think about both of
them at the same time so when you're
thinking about whether a reaction will
go forward spontaneously you're thinking
about thermodynamics and you're thinking
about how fast that reaction is going to
go you're thinking about kinetics so
let's just do a little review we've
talked about this before but it's a
clicker challenge so today let's think
back to thermodynamics and tell me what
stable unstable refers to thinking about
thermodynamics and kinetics now
okay ten more seconds
okay so most people got stability when
you're talking about stable unstable
you're not talking about rate you are
talking about Delta G you're talking
about the spontaneous tendency a chemist
if it's around a long time we're talking
about not it being stable but being
inert and in in terms of this one here
for if you're thinking about the Delta G
for the decomposition into its elements
that versus the Delta G for formation if
that's negative then it would be stable
but we want to be positive for the
decomposition all right so let's just
look at this up here so again it refers
to Delta G and label and inert AFER's to
the rate and again when you have a
negative Delta G of formation then that
makes something stable okay so
thermodynamics kinetics we want to think
about is the reaction spontaneous but we
also need to think about how long it's
going to take so rate is important and
so if we think about the average weight
our average rate of a ferris wheel I
looked it up it is thirty-one point four
seconds to spin around if you're at an
amusement park and you can think about
your experience sorry that should say
imagine one revolution every five
seconds or every five hours would be a
very different experience five seconds
would be way too fast you'd probably be
throwing up everywhere in five hours
you'd be like oh my goodness get me off
of this thing so rate matters and
chemical kinetics doesn't measure the
rate of Ferris wheels except maybe it
does if the ferris is ferrous iron then
we might be talking about its rate if
it's spinning around doing things in a
chemical reaction so we might think
about the concentration of ferrous iron
changing with time so chemical kinetics
experiments you measure concentrations
and think about how fast they're
changing with
so let's think about some of the factors
that are going to affect the rates of
chemical reactions and we'll write some
of these on the board so what's one
thing that you may have observed that
will affect either speed up or slow down
say a chemical reaction what's one thing
you can think of temperature what's
another thing you can think of paddle
catalyst so right so changing the sort
of environment so it depends a little it
could be it could be pressure it depends
on on what you're talking about what
kind of nature of material you're
talking about so possibly pressure could
have an effect and that brings us to the
nature of the material whether it's gas
or solid or other things and that also
comes to the other issue which is what
is its mechanism oops sorry mechanism so
does it have one step does it have many
steps do the steps involve changes in
phase what's going on in the mechanism
and so those are all some good things
one other thing that I'll put on which
also only applies in some cases
depending on the type of mechanism and
type of reaction would be the
concentration of the material which kind
of also gets to this pressure idea
depending on what it is how much do you
have in there all right so those are
some of the things and we're going to
talk about most of these in the next
unit all right so let's now think about
one example of a chemical reaction and
this chemical reaction is called the
oscillating clock and before we see the
demo we're going to think about what's
happening so this demo as with most
chemical reactions involves
thermodynamics chemical equilibrium
Kinetics it also has some acid-base you
have to have some acid in there to get
it to go it's also an oxidation
reduction reaction and it has colors and
we'll see that the colors change
depending on what the oxidation state of
the material is and also what it's like
and at state is so basically in one demo
you get every unit that we've had in the
second half of the course and that's
kind of true about any chemical reaction
every chemical reaction if you're
interested in it involves thinking about
all of these things that we've been
talking about
alright so oscillating clock reaction
it's a fairly complicated reaction it
has many steps and we're just gonna
break the overall reaction shown here
down into two steps today as with many
reaction mechanisms there are multiple
steps but here is step one that we'll
talk about and here is step two that
we'll talk about and step one occurs
when you're i2 concentration is low I to
here is a product of the reaction and
when it builds up too much then that
reaction will stop and so in this
reaction we have acidic conditions
you'll see our H+ and under those acidic
conditions we're going to change a clear
solution so I iodide in its certain
oxidation states is clear but when it
goes to I - it turns an amber color in
the second reaction which will only
occur when i2 is high so this will build
up shutting off reaction a and starting
reaction B in this reaction you have a
complex being formed and that's going to
change the color so we're going to go
from amber to a blue complex alright so
before we see this happen and I should
say that once you get over here you for
in the blue complex this will consume
the i2 which will cause that to drop to
be low again and then you're gonna start
reaction a again which then when it's
gotten to when when your concentration
is built up too much you'll start
reaction
again and so reaction a the reaction B
then reaction a reaction B and you'll
notice that the product of one of the
reactions is a substrate here product
here substrate here so this goes back
and forth hence the name oscillating
cloth alright so before I show you
something pretty I'm going to make you
do work and think about the oxidation
reduction reactions that are occurring
that you're going to see that lead to
these spectacular color changes alright
so here we go
clicker question
alright let's just do 10 more seconds
all right so somebody asked one it's
like how will I know that it's a
peroxide so I tried to help you out and
said reaction with hydrogen peroxide
let's see how many people some people
definitely notice that alright so let's
just take a look over here what's going
on and fill in our chart
so here the oxidation state is plus five
so we have now this oxygen is it's
normal minus 2 so minus 2 times 3 minus
6 equals the whole thing charge needs to
equal minus 1 so we need plus 5 there
and I 2 is 0 the next one I minus is
being oxidized to I 2 minus 1 to 0 the
oxygen and hydrogen peroxide is being
oxidized so it's minus 2 minus 1 here
because we have plus 2 for H and two
oxygens so that's minus one each to 0
and then again minus 1 and oxygen and
water is minus 2 so there's lots of
oxidation reduction reactions going on
and in fact this occurs in multiple
different steps so there's even more
different reactions going on that I
didn't even show you all right so we
have one more clicker question to answer
before we do the demo which is that if I
told you you want to think about iodide
you're using cuz it's changing color why
are you using the hydrogen peroxide so
tell me what is true about hydrogen
peroxide using the information given
all right ten more seconds
all right
so if we look over here it's a large
positive value and again it's a large
positive value of the standard reduction
potential is a big big value which makes
it a good oxidizing agent the reduction
is spontaneous so if you have a large
positive e that's gonna for the reaction
written as a reduction that means that
Delta G for that reduction is going to
be negative which means it's spontaneous
so things that like to be reduced or
good oxidizing agents and actually
hydrogen peroxide is really good
oxidizing agent and that's why it's used
in a lot of things all right so let's
look at this demo now so again clear -
amber amber - blue and the reaction rate
is also sensitive to temperature and you
told me temperature does affect reaction
rates and it does in this case all right
let's see it okay so we've got the
hydrogen peroxide Eric's got that his
hand he's gonna take the that off before
he actually unscrews it yay okay
hydrogen peroxide as we said it's a good
it gets reduced really easily which is
actually the reason why we kept it in a
plastic bag because even the presence of
oxygen can can cause it to be Cocozza to
react so he's gonna add solution B that
was solution a solution B contains the
aiya date which is going to provide the
yeah it's dry it's gonna provide the the
iodine for the solution and as you can
see it's turning kind of yellowish which
is what we were expecting so now the
iodide is starting to produce the iodine
and when he adds solution D we can see
it changing yeah it works it's always a
struggle whether these things will
actually work this one this one's
usually works very nicely I'm gonna turn
this up a bit more and it will actually
continue to do this for for quite a
while
yeah
so we can move this off to the side and
now we're going to see the effect of
temperature I shall move that in a
second so as Kathy mentioned affecting
temperature will affect the rates of
reactions so this guy will continue to
go and what we have here is we have all
three solutions again except they've
been they've been put in ice so we're
gonna see if we've kept this with a cold
again you should all right so that's the
peroxide we've got a solution B yeah
okay and yeah I'll get the stripper in a
second laughter B so as before you saw
the temperature change kind of quickly
this time it's not really changing that
much
so before you saw the temperature change
pretty quickly this is probably gonna
take a while to actually change it might
not change at all it's because the
reaction was so cold that you won't have
that second step and also I can't there
we go so it happens really really slowly
as you can tell whereas this one
happened very very quickly so example of
many things so we had chemical
equilibrium we had thermodynamics
talking about which reactions were
spontaneous so spontaneous until the
making the amber and then when it's made
too much of the the iodide then the i2
then we see the next reaction going
until we now have too little and then we
switch back and forth and yeah this I
think very clearly demonstrates that the
the temperature is very different has a
very different effect it's a much much
slower reaction all right thank you we
can leave them you want to just leave
them up here yeah okay let's really the
fast one up there it'll eventually stop
so it's good probably I don't know maybe
fought five minutes or more or a little
longer and then eventually it just kind
of stays this wore dark brown maybe it's
already happened we'll see if it
switches again all right so let's talk
about measuring reaction rates then
because we just saw this reaction going
in another reaction rate we saw the
effect of temperature and let's think
about how we would actually go about
measuring some of these so we can think
about measuring two different kinds of
rates an average rate and an
instantaneous rate and so first let's
talk about measuring average rate and to
do that I should switch back over here
okay so let's consider a different
reaction now one that's a little less
complicated and kind of made-up but it's
a good example no.2 plus Co goes to n o+
co2 and so if you're measuring a rate
you could think about measuring the
decrease in either of the reactants or
the increase in concentration of either
of the products so in this case let's
consider that we're measuring the change
in n oh and usually people pick the
thing to measure based on what
easiest to measure what kind of handle
you are does it have a spectroscopic
signal or something else that you can
easily measure so here we have
concentration versus time and so we
should see none in the beginning and
then we should see it increase and then
level off and we can calculate an
average rate which is just going to be
the change in concentration over the
change in time we can also express the
average rate as Delta the concentration
of no.2 elta t the change in time and we
can calculate what that would be we can
pick an interval say from 50 to 150 we
can measure some concentrations there
and then calculate the average rate the
change in concentration from the time
150 to the time 50 concentration over
that time interval and it will give us
an answer in this case 1.3 times 10 to
the minus 4 molar per second alright
well that could be useful to know but it
really depends on the average rate
depends on the time interval I picked if
I picked a different time interval I
might have gotten a different rate so
instead of calculating average rate a
lot of people want to calculate
instantaneous rate where you're asking
what is the rate at a particular time
point so now let's talk about
instantaneous rate will have the same
equation up there now instantaneous rate
is defined as the rate where you have a
limit of delta T the change in time
going to zero you're comparing
concentrations at time T and time T plus
the interval DT over this time change
again as you approach zero
you can also express this as d change in
concentration of nod2 and so as that
change in time approaches zero then the
rate becomes the slope of the line
tangent to the
curve at time T so if we wanted to say
find the instantaneous rate at 150
here's 150 we can draw a line tangent to
the curve at that time so this would be
the point at 150 and then we can
calculate the slope to tell us the
instantaneous rate so let's do that we
will calculate the slope we have to look
at what the concentrations are what the
times are and then the instantaneous
rate at 150 would be the slope of the
line this change in concentration over
that time interval and to the correct
significant figures there should be an
extra zero in there seven point seven
zero times ten to the minus five molar
per second so that would be the
instantaneous rate again the slope of
the line tangent to the curve at time
150 so you could ask what is the
instantaneous rate at 100 seconds or 200
seconds and get that instantaneous rate
people are often talking about initial
rate and by initial rate they mean the
instantaneous rate at time equals zero
so again we have two different rates we
have average rate and instantaneous rate
so now let's think about rate
expressions and then rate laws all right
so keeping with that same reaction again
we could monitor n Oh forming or sio2
forming or we could monitor either of
our reactants disappearing and if we
assume that there's no intermediates are
very slow steps then we could say that
the rate of the reaction should be equal
to the disappearance of the
concentration of no.2 or decrease in
no.2 one of our reactants over time it
should also be equal to the
disappearance of CO our other reactant
over time and also equal to the
appearance of n Oh with time
and also equal to the appearance of co2
with time and again for these all to be
equal to each other we are assuming here
there are no intermediates being formed
and or that if we are forming them then
they're independent of time in other
words if say there's a large slow step
somewhere in here we might see all the
reactants disappear but there'd be a lag
before the products would appear because
more steps and things are going on so
these are all equal to each other if you
have no intermediates or the
intermediates are not affecting the
overall rate so we could think about
this for a generic equation so if we
consider a plus B going to C plus D when
we're talking about the rates of
disappearance or appearance we have to
remember the stoichiometry of the
reaction so if we have a stoichiometry
of little a then we would say minus 1
over little a da DT stochiometry of
little B for reactant B minus 1 over B B
DB DT then formation of products 1 over
C DC DT and our other product 1 over
little D D D DT I got through it
ok so let's look at an example reaction
and why don't you tell me what the rate
is equal to
okay ten seconds
all right
still haven't gotten much into the 90s
but still I'm happy alright so here
again we're talking about the
disappearance of our reactant so it will
be minus 1/2 and the formation of one
one of our products and the formation of
the other product as well all right so
don't forget about the stoichiometry of
the reaction so these are called rate
expressions and you don't want to get
that confused with rate laws so a
problem might ask write the rate
expression this is what it's looking for
if it says write the rate law it's going
to be looking for the following thing so
a rate law is a relationship between
rate and concentration and they are
related by a proportionality constant
little K which is called the rate
constant so big K is what equilibrium
constant little K is a rate constant all
right so let's look at a reaction and so
a reaction of a plus B C going to C plus
D the rate law could be expressed rate
equals rate constant K times the
concentration of a to the M and B to the
n where m and n are the order of the
reaction in a and B respectively and K
again is our rate constant all right so
let's look at what I call the truth
about rate laws so the first thing you
cannot just look at the stochiometry of
the equation and say oh it's going to
have this M for a based on its dokey AMA
tree
unless it's what's called an elementary
reaction and we're going to get to that
on Wednesday after Thanksgiving make
sure you come Wednesday after
Thanksgiving that's the lecture on
mechanism it's a really important
lecture in kinetics so we'll learn about
elementary reactions so you can't just
look at the stochiometry and write
the rate law you need experiment so the
rate law is not just limited to
reactants although largely it's true
that the rate laws will just have
reactants it can also have a product
term like C could appear in the rate law
how would you know this well it would be
experiment would tell you whether this
was true or not so for this rate law we
saw this already the order of the
reaction in a is is M and the order of
the reaction and B is N and M and n can
be integers they can be fractions or
they can be positive and they can be
negative so now we're going to think
about all these different orders of
reaction and think about what and we'll
do it just for a what M is equal to so
we're going to fill in this table here
and some of these things are in your
notes some of them you need to fill in
so we're going to start with M equals
one and this is called a first order
reaction the rate law for this the rate
would equal the rate constant times the
concentration of a and now let's just
think if this is a first order reaction
that just depends on a if you double the
concentration of a what do you expect
will happen to the rate what it will
double right so in first order reaction
you double the concentration of
something and the rate will double and
this is how you figure out what the
order of the reaction is you double the
concentration of something leaving
everything else the same and see the
effect on rate so again these are
experimentally determined now let's
consider N equals two and notice the
blue went away here and so but it's
still there so you can see it alright
second order what does the rate equal so
it would equal K or rate constant times
the concentration of a
now we have a two so it's raised to the
power of M and that's to so that's how
we would write the rate law for
something that was second order in a so
now let's think about if you double the
concentration of a what would you
acquire opal right now what about if it
triples why don't you tell me what would
happen then all right ten seconds very
fast
90% yes okay so yes
nine times all right and in problem set
none which is already posted there's all
sorts of problems where you see the
effects and you can figure out what the
right order of the reaction is all right
so now let's consider minus one over
here which is often not referred to by
any name the rate here would be equal to
K concentration of a to the minus 1 and
if we double the concentration of this
you can just yell out what would happen
to the rate half yes all right now to M
equals minus 1/2 so the rate here would
be K equals concentration of a raised to
the minus 1/2 and now if we double
that's our last clicker question on this
sheet so why don't you tell me what
happens and this should be fast too
all right ten more seconds
all right so going back over here right
we have point seven times which is 2 to
the minus 1/2 and when you're looking at
the effects of the rate on concentration
you'll see the concentration double and
you're like what on earth happened to
the rate keep in mind this minus 1/2
because it's very hard to think about
what the relationship is so again they
can be fractions positive or negative
all right so back up here now this
actually is called 1/2 order so we would
have a rate that is equal to K times the
concentration of a raised to the 1/2 and
if we double that you can just yell out
what would happen so one point four
times the rate and finally M equals zero
what do you think that is likely to be
called that is zero order so at least
some things are pretty easy to to guess
and if we think about the rate what
would the rate be equal to just K right
it's just going to be equal to K so it
doesn't zero order the a term is not
there so if we double the concentration
of something that is zero order what
happens to the rate nothing right no
effect on rate the concentration term
isn't part of the equation so the
problem set 9 will have a lot of
experiments and you need to figure out
by looking at what is happening what the
order of the reaction is is it doubling
when you double the rate is it
quadrupling is it doing some weird thing
that seems to be a negative for a tan
inverse fraction and that will allow you
to figure out what the order is okay so
once you figure out the order of the
reaction then the next truth about rate
laws is that the overall order of the
action is just the sum of the exponents
in the rate law so for example if we
have this reaction what would be the
overall order you can just know that yep
it would be a third order or the order
would be three now you don't some people
get this wrong on a test it's like no
you want to save your points for
something that's hard two plus one is
three so remember that okay and this
would be then second order an a you
would say that's first order and B over
all third order so if you're going to
lose points on an exam on this material
I recommend losing them determining the
units for the rate constant because
that's much more complicated than
figuring out the overall order of the
reaction the units it depends on the
order you can have squared you can have
molar squared quadrupled molar to the
minus fractions all sorts of crazy
things happen in your units of rate
constants so save your points if you're
gonna lose some and I think would be
great if you got a hundred everyone got
100 but if you're gonna lose some lose
them on that that's harder okay so we'll
end there for today and Wednesday we're
going to be talking about integrated
rate laws half a half life for
first-order nuclear chemistry it's going
to be very exciting and slightly
radioactive so where were we we were
talking about the fact about how you
measure instantaneous rates and average
rates and and one of the the issues of
doing kinetics experiments it's all
experimental you want to measure things
but it can be very challenging to
measure initial rates because you're
often talking about a very small change
in concentration and so it can be
helpful sometimes to use integrated rate
laws which allow you to measure a lot of
different concentrations as times
and plot that data to get out rate
constants and things like that
so we're going to talk about integrated
rate laws and so this is the alternative
then is to use this integrated rate law
again expresses concentrations directly
as a function of time and gets that this
small change changes problem alright so
we're going to talk about first order
now and then we'll talk about second
order in a little bit so for a first
order equation we have a going to be and
we learned last time that we can write a
rate expression for a first order
process or for this process here so we
could talk about the rate expression as
the disappearance of a - D concentration
of a DT we can also write the rate law
for a first order equation and that
would be K our rate constant times our
concentration so the rate expression has
the DDT and the rate law has K our rate
constant in it alright so using these
two things that we learn last time we
can do a derivation to get our
integrated first-order rate law so in
this derivation we're going to separate
our concentration terms on one side and
our time terms on the other side so
we're gonna bring over our concentration
of a over here so we'll divide by the
concentration of a we have our D
concentration of a term from here we're
going to take our minus side put it on
the other side and we're going to take
our DT our time term and put it over
there as well with our rate constant so
we have the terms that have
concentration of a on one side and we
have our terms with rate constant and
time on the other now we can integrate
both sides and we will integrate from
our original concentration of a
that's a to the Oh for our original
concentration up to concentration at
whatever time team we stopped the
experiment and through all the times in
between over one over the concentration
of a DA and on the other side we have
our minus rate constant K and we're
looking at the time from time 0 to time
T when we stop the experiment alright so
we can take this expression out and move
it up because I have more derivation to
go so I'm going to put it on the top of
the screen and now I am going to solve
it so the this integral solves to the
natural log of the concentration of a at
time t minus the natural log of our
original concentration of a on the other
side minus KT our time so there are two
ways we can rewrite this equation we can
write it as the equation for a straight
line and all I did was take this natural
log of a zero or a original over here
and we could also rearrange this term
instead of minus we have natural log of
the concentration of a at time T over
our original concentration and now we
can take the inverse national natural
log of both sides and so we get rid of
natural log here and on the other side
we have e to the minus KT again the rate
constant times the time and then I can
write it break this out here moving the
original concentration of a to this side
and now this is the equation for the
integrated first-order rate law where
you have the concentration of a at some
point T equals its original
concentration times e to the minus K the
rate constant times the time so if you
know a rate constant how much time is
elapsed and you know how much you have
as something originally you can figure
out how much you should have now or if
you figure out how the concentration
changes over time you can use and how
much you had originally you can
calculate the rate constant
for that particular material and you can
do those calculations for rate constants
by plotting using this equation for a
straight line so here I'm going to plot
natural log of a so I measure the
concentration a of various different
times against time and we have an
equation for a straight line so we
should get a straight line if this is a
first order process and so what would
this be up here what is the y-intercept
what is it
so that's the natural log of our
original concentration and this you can
yell more loudly what is our slope yes
it's a little bit easier than yell
loudly - K so you can experimentally
determine the rate constant from this so
if you measure how the concentration of
a changes with time
plot your data natural log of those
concentrations versus time get a lot of
data points from the slope you can
measure the rate constant and so rate
constants for a lot of different
materials have already been measured in
this kind of way all right
so for a first order process this is
these are important equations but also
for forced order we spend a lot of time
talking about half-life so half-life is
the time it takes for half of the
original material to go away so it's a
really easy thing it is I like it when
things are called what they are and here
the time involved has a little special
abbreviation T 1/2 so whenever you see T
1/2 that's talking about a half-life so
we can derive this expression as well
for the first-order half-life using the
expressions that we just looked at so
from the expression we had above where
we had the natural log of the
concentration of a at time T / original
concentration equals minus the rate
constant K times time and now we can
substitute in so we're not interested in
just any old time we're interested in
time 1/2 so we're going to want to put
1/2 in there and that is the time it
takes for the original amount to go to
1/2 so to be divided by 2 so we can put
that in so now our 80-hour concentration
of a at times T is our original
concentration divided by 2 and our T is
T 1/2 so you'll see that the a0 terms
are going to cancel out and you're going
to end up with natural log of 1/2 equals
minus K times our half-life t 1/2 and so
then we can put in our value
you for the natural log of 1/2 and get
rid of all those minus signs and
rearrange it and so then our half-life
for this first order process is going to
be equal to 0.96 3 1 divided by K the
rate constant so you'll note a couple of
perhaps important things about this
expression and one of the important
things is that half-life doesn't depend
on the concentration so the
concentration term has dropped out so
what does half-life depend on then if it
doesn't depend on the concentration
again this is for first-order so it's
going to depend on K that's all that's
in there there's only one thing that's
in there there's a number a constant and
there's K so half-life depends on K this
rate constant and the rate constant
depends on the material in question so
different materials will have different
values of rate constant and we just saw
how you can calculate a rate constant
you can measure it from and get the
slope of the line and tells you about
what K is all right so let's use this
expression now and why don't you tell me
for the same material which of these
things which of these events will take
longer
all right ten more seconds
so it takes in fact the same amount of
time because the concentration doesn't
show up in there and it was the same
material all right so before we move
away from this you can write same amount
of time in your notes let's take a look
at this plot on the bottom of the page
and just think about what's happening
because you can talk about a first half
life in the second half life and a third
half life so we can just fill this right
in so for a concentration at your first
half life how much is left so what's
this number the concentration is what
half second half life what do we got
Oh point two five third point one two
five right so this is pretty easy to
think about but sometimes when you have
data and you're looking at it you have
to remember what the sort of
possibilities are okay so that's
first-order half-life and that's the end
of this lecture but we're not really
moving away from the topic because now
we're going to talk about example of a
first order process which is radioactive
decay